In this video, we can
add some extra power to
our PivotTables by
introducing calculations.
In our next example,
[inaudible] would like to
get a snapshot of what
the investment amount would look
like in Australian dollars.
Now there are three approaches
that he could take: one
is he could go and add another
column into the raw data.
That however is not always
a realistic option,
and if we just want a snapshot,
you don't want to be
updating your raw data.
Another approach would be to
just add a calculation right
here in your worksheet
using data from the pivot.
We could just say equals
and I'm just going
to type in b_4 times 1.45,
and if I copy that down,
I got my answer.
The only problem is if
the PivotTable changes.
So for example I remove my
filter, that's not working.
If I were to add another
field into my columns,
I would end up replacing
this calculation altogether,
so I'm going to undo that change.
That's really not ideal.
Sometimes the best
option is actually
include the calculation
in the Pivot,
and we have two
ways of doing this.
These are called Calculated
Fields and Calculated Items.
We're going to start with
looking at a calculated field.
Adding a calculated
field to Pivot is
almost the equivalent of adding
another column into
your raw data.
The difference is it
doesn't actually take up
any space in your worksheet
like one of these grand totals.
It's calculated on the go.
To create a calculated field,
just click anywhere
into a PivotTable.
Come to a PivotTable Analyze,
and in the calculation section,
we're going to select
fields, items, and sets.
Right at the top is the option
to add a calculated field,
and the first thing
we have to do is
give this new field
a sensible name.
Now we need to provide
it with the calculation.
So we're going to click in
the box and just
remove that zero.
It's a placeholder.
Our formula is going to be
our US dollar amount, multiply,
so asterisk by 1.45 so adjusting
for the exchange rate.
You can use any
arithmetic operations.
You can use aggregation
functions like sum and average.
You can even use the
logical functions
like if, and, and or.
But there are certain limitations
to these calculations.
For one thing you can refer to
any values outside
of the PivotTable.
That's because the
Pivot uses an area
of memory called the Pivot cache.
Where all the data is loaded
into and it actually can
refer to other values.
So if I try to click on
somewhere outside the Pivot,
it's not even going to let me.
This means there
are quite a lot of
Excel functions you can use,
like VLOOKUPs for example.
So while there are
some limitations,
this is still fantastic
if you needed to
calculate something like
just for this example.
There's a calculation,
we're going to click Okay,
and it's added our
additional column and
this time if I were
to remove my filter,
you see it still works.
Now I'm going to undo again
because I do want that filter on.
Once we add a calculated field,
you will see it adds
it to our field list.
So we can work with it
just like we would
any other field.
We could even use this to create
another calculated
field if it wanted to.
To remove a calculated field,
we have to reverse the procedure.
So I'm going to click
somewhere in my Pivot,
come to PivotTable
Analyze, come to fields,
items and sets, and
select calculated field.
Now to find the fields
I've already added,
I come to the drop-down arrow,
and you can see
we've only got one,
and if I select it I now have
the option to modify
it or delete it.
I'm going to click Delete,
and then Okay, and it's gone.
So really useful option,
but it does come with
a small caution.
When we create a standard
Excel calculation,
each uses the cells
we've selected.
But calculated fields actually
use entire columns of data,
and that can sometimes lead
to unexpected results.
Allow me to demonstrate.
So I've got my demo workbook
that we were looking at before,
and I've got a very
simple Pivot here showing
a number of items and
how many were sold.
Now what I would do is
create a calculated field
that will multiply the
quantity by the price,
and to keep it simple they
are all priced at $10.
So we are going to come
to PivotTable Analyze,
fields, items and sets,
calculated field, and this
is going to be my cost.
I'm just going to take
price and multiply that by
quantity and when I say
okay at first glance I seem
to have got the answer right.
But when I look at the total,
something extremely
odd has happened.
Forty two items at $10 each,
I should be getting $420.
In t dollars, so what's going on?
Like I said, the
Calculated Fields are
actually working with
the entire columns.
What's happened here is,
it's added up all
the prices and then
multiply that by the
42 to get our 5,040.
Now we could just
hide the grand total,
make the problem go away.
But we do need to
be a little careful
because if I swap product
out of the category,
you can see those prices
are totally incorrect.
We do need to be a little careful
when working with the
calculated items,
but not to put you off.
They can give you some great
analytical capabilities.
Back in my original workbook,
we're going to look at the
other type of calculation,
which is called a
Calculated Item.
Unlike a calculated field,
calculated items
are the equivalent
of creating another row.
Let's for example say that I
wanted to get my
total for Brazil,
Ecuador, and Italy, and show
that as a row in its own rights.
I could do that using
a calculated item.
There is a restriction however
with calculated items,
you cannot add a
calculated item to
a PivotTable that has
a group field in it.
Now you might recall
that we actually
group our date function
to get our years.
If I click somewhere
into my row labels,
come up to Fields,
Items and Sets, and
select "Calculated Item",
it tells me "No".
Well that's not a problem.
I can just go and create
another PivotTable.
Well there again, you
may run into issues.
In the newer versions of Excel,
when you create a PivotTable
from the same data source,
it automatically shares
the pivot cache.
In other words, when I go
and create a separate PivotTable,
it is still going to
have disuse field.
So I'm still not
going to be able to
add a calculated item.
What we're going to look at
next is a workaround for
creating a PivotTable that
has its own pivot cache.
This does have the downside of
effectively doubling
our PivotTable storage,
but it will give
us the flexibility
to work with it independently.
We're going to come back to
our renewable investments.
Click somewhere in the data,
and a strange keyboard shortcut.
We're going to press Alt,
D and P. This opens up
our PivotChart wizard.
This is actually an old wizard,
which is no longer
available in the ribbon.
But you can customize
your ribbon and edit.
Or you can customize your
Quick Access Toolbar.
I find it easier to just use Alt,
D and P. Now first we're
just going to click "Next."
It is not picking up our
table name automatically.
That's because the
wizard predates tables.
Now we're just going to replace
that with tblinvestment,
and then I'm going
to click "Next."
This wordy dialogue is trying to
persuade you to share a cache,
and if you click "Yes",
that's what will happen.
But we're going to select
"No" and just click "Finish."
Now we've created a new
PivotTable from the same data.
But if we have a look down here,
there's no years field.
We can see this is definitely
using its own cache.
Let's quickly create output.
I'm going to add
region and amount.
What Ron wants to do is rather
than showing these
discrete values,
he would like to see
the percentage of
investment in Europe versus Asia,
and then the percentage of
North America versus Asia.
To do this, we're going to
add two calculated items.
Making sure we've click
somewhere into the row labels,
we're going to come up to Fields,
Items and Sets, and
we're going to choose
"Calculated Item."
You see this dialog looks
a little bit different
because it doesn't just
give you the fields,
it gives you the items
within the field.
The first one we're
going to create is
going to be EU versus Asia.
We're going to replace
the zero by taking
our Europe investment and
dividing it by our
Asia investment,
and then we're going
to click "Add."
Now to add the next one,
we need to first
give it a new name.
This is going to be North
America versus Asia.
Again we need to select region.
This time we're going
to take North America
and divide it by Asia
and then we're going
to click "Okay".
Our two calculated
items have been added.
Now it doesn't really make sense
to compare two different things,
like miles versus liters.
We are going to come to our rows,
we're going to unselect all,
we're just going to
show our two new items.
Then we should probably turn off
our grand totals as well.
In our design tab,
let's flip those off,
and let's convert
these to percentages.
There's our completed PivotTable
using our two calculations.
While there are obviously
a few limitations with
Calculated Fields and
Calculated Items,
they do unlock a wealth
of opportunities.
Make sure that you
download the workbook
and practice these
great new skills.